>> Richard Feldman: We'll see how
to actually make one of these.
So, the way to do this is using
the port keyword on the Elm side and
we're gonna make some changes directly
to index.html on the JavaScript side.
It's worth noting that technically on the
JavaScript side if we wanted to we could
use like a .js file and stuff like that.
But we're just gonna write the JavaScript
side of this code directly into index.html
because that way,
we don't have to introduce a new file.
Okay, ports, if you're gonna use the port
keyword, which is the keyword that you
use to talk to JavaScript,
you have to do it inside a port module.
Which basically means, at the top of
your module where you say module article
exposing whatever, or
module main exposing whatever.
You add that port keyword at the top, and
this means that any time you're wondering
whether a given module does or
does not do JavaScript interrupt,
you can tell that from
the very first line of code.
You just glance at it,
if it says port module, then yes,
it's doing JavaScript interrupt.
If it doesn't, then it's not.
So here's how we would
create one of these things.
We would say, port storeSession and
that's gonna take in our particular
example a maybe string and
that's gonna return a command message.
So this port key word essentially says,
hey, Elm make this function exist for me.
This is one of the only cases in Elm where
we don't actually write out the definition
of this function.
We just write the type and
Elm will generate a function
that does that thing for us.
So the port keywords says I wanna
make something called storeSession.
This gonna be a function.
I want it to accept a Maybe string and
we'll get into why a Maybe string later,
and then what it's going
to do is just going to send
that Maybe string out to JavaScript.
And it's then it's gonna return a command
which says okay, this is a command
which when executed will send that value
to Java Script and then do nothing.
We're not gonna get any message back
because this is fire and forget,
just send it across the wall.
The reverse of that is onSessionChange,
so this is the sort of the inbound port,
this is when JavaScript
sends a value to us.
And it has a slightly different syntax.
First it accepts a message that says okay,
we're going to get in a string from
JavaScript and we're going to
convert that into a message.
And that'll give us back a subscription
with that particular message.
So between the two, we now have Elm
creating the implementations for
both of these.
And we have, in the first case, a way to
generate a command that will say, okay,
update.
We are going to send this value out
to JavaScript, this Maybe String.
And on the flip side we also
have a way to say, hey,
whenever JavaScript sends us one of these
strings, wrap it up in this message type.
And then that's gonna be what gets
send to update as our subscription.
So as long as we
are subscribed to this thing,
we will get those messages flowing into
update every time JavaScript sends us one.
And with this one every time we want to
send something to JavaScript we can do so
using that command.
Okay, so here's the Elm side.
On the JavaScript side, we're gonna start
with this one line of code which is
basically what we always do to
start up and Elm application,
we call Elm.Main.init.
We're not really gonna talk too much about
flags, but essentially flags are our way
to get some initial value from
JavaScript into Elm on start up.
So this is not done with ports,
it's done with a separate mechanism,
but essentially it follows
the same characteristics as these.
These are made available to Elm,
these flags,
sort of in the same way as when you
start up a command line application.
You get those flags that are only
available on startup, and
then if they want,
they can use them to get going.
In our case, this is just an example
of passing in the initial session so
that the very first time the page renders,
we can know if the user is logged in.
So what we're doing here is we're
describing a way to storeSession
information.
Which is to say
the authentication information,
the current users username,
their avatar, stuff like that and
dealing with when it changes using
a library known as local forage.
So localForage is a wrapper around
local storage and indexdb and
a couple of different technologies.
And were going to assume that we have
some business requirement to store our
session in that.
Now in the actual example of this thing,
the SPA example,
the real world application,
it uses local storage.
But for purposes of this exercise
we're gonna be using local forage and
we're gonna be talking to it
using these APIs right here.
Okay, so this right here,
starts up our Elm application, and
here's how you subscribe to
this storeSession command.
So we say app.ports which is basically
an object containing all of the ports
that we've defined anywhere
on our Elm application.
.storeSession which is to say that name
corresponds the name of the Elm function.
.subscribe and
then we pass it a function that says okay,
give me a string and
I will do something with it.
So then right in here,
we write some js code.
And then,
every time that command gets run,
this JavaScript code will get executed.
And it will get executed being passed the
string that was passed in to this command.
Now, you might notice that on
the Elm side this is a maybe string,
whereas on the JavaScript side,
we just said str.
Now the reason for that is that if we want
to send a null value into JavaScript,
this is how we do it.
So when we're storing the session,
there's really two different
use cases that we have there.
One is we want to say, I just logged in,
or maybe I just signed up and
I want to store this user as,
yeah, this is the new session.
This is their authentication token,
this is their username etc.
Please go persist that so that it will
still be around when we refresh the page.
We also might want to use this for
logging out.
So we log out we might wanna say,
hey,, just clear that sucker out.
Well, I don't wanna store that anymore,
we're logged out,
we're all done with that.
So in that case we would send nothing.
And say, yeah, we're just logged out,
just don't do anything more with that,
just please clear that out.
So on the JavaScript side we
can now compare this to null or
not depending on what Elm sent us.
But this is essentially the way to
specify, hey, I wanna send a null
value from Elm to JavaScript, even though
Elm doesn't have a concept of null.
The way that the port keyword works is
it knows when you send them Maybe, and
then a primitive like a string,
then it means I might be sending it null.
If I see nothing send null,
and I don't see nothing,
if I see just,
then send that value unwrapped.
The same thing on the other side, if we
wanted to we can accept a Maybe string
from JavaScript and say, perhaps
JavaScript is going to send us a null
session, which we can convert into
nothing in the case of Maybe.
Okay, so
that's setting the thing in the session.
So taking that command and then on the
JavaScript side every time that command
gets run from Elm this callback will fire
and we can do whatever JS code we want.
We could write arbitrary JS code here.
It can do all the side effects in the
world, it can do all the HTTP requests and
anything you want.
And it's all fine because
essentially we've said yeah, well,
this is the command, commands can do that,
commands can actually do whatever.
Except in this case, whereas usually it's
the Elm run time executing the side effect
or whatever else.
In this case all the Elm run time is doing
is it's firing a JavaScript callback, and
it's up to JavaScript to
do whatever else it wants.
But the fundamental characteristics
are still the same.
Finally, we have onSessionChange and
here we say app.ports.onSessionChang.send
and we pass in some string.
This is JavaScript saying hey Elm,
here's a piece of information.
I'm gonna pass this string into you and
then Elms go say great,
I've now got that string.
Fortunately, I have this handy dandy
function that converts from a string to
a message, so
I'm gonna call this function to convert
it into my particular message type.
And then that message is gonna go straight
into update with the current model and
then from there update being brains of
our application it's gonna do it's thing.
It's gonna handle that message and
it's gonna resolve based on
whatever we want JavaScript to do.
So in the exercise that we go through,
we're gonna use localForage to
detect whenever the session changes.
Which could be because it
changed in a different tab.
That's something that can happen
with browser persistence,
is you have multiple tabs open.
Somebody logs out in one and
you wanna be logged out in all of them.
And then, since each of those are going to
be subscribed to changes in the session,
that's gonna be immediately reflected
as soon as the logout actually happens.
Okay, cool, so
that's what we're sort of building up to
is storing session data in localForage.
The localForage API is very simple, so
I'm just gonna cover it very quickly.
Here's how it works,
you say localForage.getItem,
which is to say, some key value,
localForage is a key value store.
So you parse it the key which in our case,
is gonna be the string session.
And then it runs a callback that says,
I obtained the value at that key,
which might be null, if it was missing and
then you run the code in that callback.
So that's, in here, that's where we would
say, app.ports.onSesionChange.send.
Also, you can setItem, very similar API
except here we're giving in the key and
the value that we want to store
inside the storage system.
And that also takes a callback which will
execute based on whatever it's doing.
I've already written
these into index.html.
So there's no need to
actually change these things.
But if you wanna go
look inside index.html,
you can do that just to see
how things are wired up.
And that'll be important to know what
names to use for the ports, because
the port names need to correspond to the
names being used on the JavaScript side.
Okay, one last note about
JavaScript interrupt via ports.
There's a very important question to ask,
which is,
who owns this particular piece of state?
We're gonna cover this topic in
more depth in the advanced course.
But it's very important not to have
multiple sources of truth as to who's in
charge of that state.
We really want it to be either Elm's in
charge of this particular piece of state
or JavaScript is.
In the case of our session,
we've made a conscious decision,
we say you know what,
this session lives in localForage.
It is localForage's job
to manage that session.
We're gonna just sort of cache the current
session in the model, because we
don't want to have to go and make
a round-trip and say, hey, JavaScript,
what's the current value, what's the
current value, what's the current value.
But is just a cache on top of that, we
view the source of truth as localForage.
And it's important to pick one.
If you sort of try to pick two and say,
well, Elm kind of in charge of it,
then also,
JavaScript's kind of in charge of it.
You can end up with some
really unfortunate bugs.
So definitely important from a design
perspective to sort of pick one or
the other.
Okay, in the case of localForage,
JavaScript owns the state and
Elm is just going to cache it.
Cool, so we talked about
subscriptions which look like this.
They're sort of like
the inverse of commands.
They look like sub messages
instead of command message.
We talked about some of the important
guarantees that Elm wants to preserve such
as that all functions are pure.
And we wanna preserve those guarantees
while we are inter-operating with
JavaScript which has a different set
of guarantees that it abides by.
We talked about how to send data to
JavaScript using a port that results in
a command message that will send
that data out to JavaScript.
And if JavaScript has wired up a callback
to that then that callback will execute
receiving whatever value that
we sent over the wall to it.
And finally,
we talked about how to receive data
from JavaScript by specifying a port
that deals with a function that
returns a message based on whatever
value we got from JavaScript.
And then a subscription which in turn
says every time we get one of these from
JavaScript, we're going to feed that to
update, then update's gonna do its thing.